A-Maze-ing
This is the way
Summary: Create your own maze generator and display its result!
Version: 2.1Contents
IForewords2
IIAI Instructions3
Common Instructions
General Rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Makefile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Additional Guidelines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .5
5
5
6
Mandatory part
IV.1
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
IV.2
Usage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
IV.3
Configuration file format . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
IV.4
Maze Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
IV.5
Output File Format . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .7
7
7
7
8
8
III
III.1
III.2
III.3
IV
VVisual representation10
VICode reusability requirements13
VIIReadme Requirements14
VIIIBonuses16
IXSubmission and peer-evaluation17
1Chapter I
Forewords
Mazes have fascinated humans for thousands of years. From the legendary Labyrinth
of Knossos in Greek mythology — built by Daedalus to imprison the Minotaur — to
modern puzzle books and video games, mazes have always symbolized mystery, challenge,
and clever design. In computer science, maze generation is more than just fun: it’s a
practical application of algorithms, randomness, and graph theory. Some famous algo-
rithms used for maze generation — like Prim’s, Kruskal’s, or the recursive backtracker
— are also used in real-world problems like network design or procedural content gener-
ation. Interestingly, perfect mazes (with one unique path between any two points) are
directly related to spanning trees in graph theory. Building a maze, especially one you
can visualize and share, is a great way to explore how computers can create structure
from chaos — and have a bit of fun while doing it.
“A labyrinth is not a place to be lost, but a path to be found.”
— Anonymous
2Chapter II
AI Instructions
● Context
During your learning journey, AI can assist with many different tasks. Take the time to
explore the various capabilities of AI tools and how they can support your work. How-
ever, always approach them with caution and critically assess the results. Whether it’s
code, documentation, ideas, or technical explanations, you can never be completely sure
that your question was well-formed or that the generated content is accurate. Your peers
are a valuable resource to help you avoid mistakes and blind spots.
● Main message
☛ Use AI to reduce repetitive or tedious tasks.
☛ Develop prompting skills — both coding and non-coding — that will benefit your
future career.
☛ Learn how AI systems work to better anticipate and avoid common risks, biases,
and ethical issues.
☛ Continue building both technical and power skills by working with your peers.
☛ Only use AI-generated content that you fully understand and can take responsibility
for.
● Learner rules:
• You should take the time to explore AI tools and understand how they work, so
you can use them ethically and reduce potential biases.
• You should reflect on your problem before prompting — this helps you write clearer,
more detailed, and more relevant prompts using accurate vocabulary.
• You should develop the habit of systematically checking, reviewing, questioning,
and testing anything generated by AI.
• You should always seek peer review — don’t rely solely on your own validation.
3A-Maze-ing
This is the way
● Phase outcomes:
• Develop both general-purpose and domain-specific prompting skills.
• Boost your productivity with effective use of AI tools.
• Continue strengthening computational thinking, problem-solving, adaptability, and
collaboration.
● Comments and examples:
• You’ll regularly encounter situations — exams, evaluations, and more — where
you must demonstrate real understanding. Be prepared, keep building both your
technical and interpersonal skills.
• Explaining your reasoning and debating with peers often reveals gaps in your un-
derstanding. Make peer learning a priority.
• AI tools often lack your specific context and tend to provide generic responses. Your
peers, who share your environment, can offer more relevant and accurate insights.
• Where AI tends to generate the most likely answer, your peers can provide alter-
native perspectives and valuable nuance. Rely on them as a quality checkpoint.
✓ Good practice:
I ask AI: “How do I test a sorting function?” It gives me a few ideas. I try them out
and review the results with a peer. We refine the approach together.
✗ Bad practice:
I ask AI to write a whole function, copy-paste it into my project. During peer-
evaluation, I can’t explain what it does or why. I lose credibility — and I fail my
project.
✓ Good practice:
I use AI to help design a parser. Then I walk through the logic with a peer. We catch
two bugs and rewrite it together — better, cleaner, and fully understood.
✗ Bad practice:
I let Copilot generate my code for a key part of my project. It compiles, but I can’t
explain how it handles pipes. During the evaluation, I fail to justify and I fail my
project.
4Chapter III
Common Instructions
III.1
General Rules
• Your project must be written in Python 3.10 or later.
• Your project must adhere to the flake8 coding standard.
• Your functions should handle exceptions gracefully to avoid crashes. Use try-except
blocks to manage potential errors. Prefer context managers for resources like files or
connections to ensure automatic cleanup. If your program crashes due to unhandled
exceptions during the review, it will be considered non-functional.
• All resources (e.g., file handles, network connections) must be properly managed to
prevent leaks. Use context managers where possible for automatic handling.
• Your code must include type hints for function parameters, return types, and vari-
ables where applicable (using the typing module). Use mypy for static type check-
ing. All functions must pass mypy without errors.
• Include docstrings in functions and classes following PEP 257 (e.g., Google or
NumPy style) to document purpose, parameters, and returns.
III.2
Makefile
Include a Makefile in your project to automate common tasks. It must contain the
following rules (mandatory lint implies the specified flags; it is strongly recommended to
try –strict for enhanced checking):
• install: Install project dependencies using pip, uv, pipx, or any other package
manager of your choice.
• run: Execute the main script of your project (e.g., via Python interpreter).
• debug: Run the main script in debug mode using Python’s built-in debugger (e.g.,
pdb).
• clean: Remove temporary files or caches (e.g., __pycache__, .mypy_cache) to
keep the project environment clean.
5A-Maze-ing
This is the way
• lint: Execute the commands flake8 . and mypy . --warn-return-any
--warn-unused-ignores --ignore-missing-imports --disallow-untyped-defs
--check-untyped-defs
• lint-strict (optional): Execute the commands flake8 . and mypy . --strict
III.3
Additional Guidelines
• Create test programs to verify project functionality (not submitted or graded). Use
frameworks like pytest or unittest for unit tests, covering edge cases.
• Include a .gitignore file to exclude Python artifacts.
• It is recommended to use virtual environments (e.g., venv or conda) for dependency
isolation during development.
If any additional project-specific requirements apply, they will be stated immediately below
this section.
6Chapter IV
Mandatory part
IV.1
Summary
You will implement a maze generator in Python that takes a configuration file, generates
a maze, possibly perfect (with a single path between entrance and exit), and writes it to a
file using a hexadecimal wall representation. You will also provide a visual representation
of the maze and organize your code so that the generation logic can be reused later.
IV.2
Usage
Your program must be run with the following command:
python3 a_maze_ing.py config.txt
• a_maze_ing.py is your main program file. You must use this name.
• config.txt is the only argument. It is a plain text file that defines the maze
generation options. You can use a different filename.
Your program must handle all errors gracefully: invalid configuration, file not found, bad
syntax, impossible maze parameters, etc. It must never crash unexpectedly, and must
always provide a clear error message to the user.
IV.3
Configuration file format
The configuration file must contain one ‘KEY=VALUE‘ pair per line.
Lines starting with # are comments and must be ignored.
The following keys are mandatory:
Key
Description
Example
WIDTH
Maze width (number of cells) WIDTH=20
HEIGHT
Maze height
HEIGHT=15
ENTRY
Entry coordinates (x,y)
ENTRY=0,0
EXIT
Exit coordinates (x,y)
EXIT=19,14
OUTPUT_FILE Output filename
OUTPUT_FILE=maze.txt
PERFECT
Is the maze perfect?
PERFECT=True
7A-Maze-ing
This is the way
You may add additional keys (e.g., seed, algorithm, display mode) if useful.
A default configuration file must be available in your Git repository.
IV.4
Maze Requirements
• The maze must be randomly generated, but reproducibility via a seed is required.
• Each cell of the maze has between 0 and 4 walls, at each cardinal point (North,
Est, South, West).
• The maze must be valid, meaning:
◦ Entry and exit exist and are different, inside the maze bounds.
◦ The structure ensures full connectivity and no isolated cells (except the ’42’
pattern, see below).
◦ As entry and exist are specific cells, there must be walls at the external borders.
◦ Your generated data must be coherent: each neighbouring cell must have the
same wall if any. E.g., it is forbidden to have a first cell with a wall on the
east side, and the second cell behind that wall without a wall on the west side.
• The maze can’t have large open areas. Corridors can’t be wider than 2 cells.
For example, you can have 2x3 or 3x2 open area, but never a 3x3 open area.
• When visually represented (see below), the maze must contain a visible “42” drawn
by several fully closed cells.
• If the PERFECT flag is activated, the maze must contain exactly one path between
the entry and the exit (i.e., it must be a perfect maze).
The “42” pattern may be omitted in case the maze size does not allow
it (i.e. too small). Print an error message on the console in that
case.
IV.5
Output File Format
The maze must be written in the output file using one hexadecimal digit per cell, where
each digit encodes which walls are closed:
Bit
0 (LSB)
1
2
3
Direction
North
East
South
West
8A-Maze-ing
This is the way
• A wall being closed sets the bit to 1, open means 0.
Example: 3 (binary 0011) means walls are open to the south and west. Or A
(binary 1010) means that east and west walls are closed.
• Cells are stored row by row, one row per line.
• After an empty line, the following 3 elements are inserted in the output file on 3
lines:
◦ the entry coordinates, the exit coordinates, and the shortest valid path from
entry to exit, using the four letters N , E , S , W .
• All lines end with a \n .
In conjunction with its specific configuration file, this output file could be tested automat-
ically by a Moulinette. Also, a validation script is provided with this subject to control
that the output file contains coherent data.
Output file example
9Chapter V
Visual representation
Your program must provide a way to display the maze visually, using either:
• Terminal ASCII rendering, or
• A graphical display using the MiniLibX (MLX) library.
The visual should clearly show walls, entry, exit, and the solution path.
User interactions must be available, at least for the following tasks:
• Re-generate a new maze and display it.
• Show/Hide a valid shortest path from the entrance to the exit.
• Change maze wall colours.
• Optional: set specific colours to display the “42” pattern.
You can add extra user interactions.
10A-Maze-ing
This is the way
Terminal default rendering of the maze
Different maze, shortest path and wall colours
11A-Maze-ing
This is the way
Maze rendering using Mlx
12Chapter VI
Code reusability requirements
You must implement the maze generation as a unique class (e.g., ‘MazeGenerator‘) inside
a standalone module that can be imported in a future project.
You must provide a short documentation describing how to:
• Instantiate and use your generator, with at least a basic example.
• Pass custom parameters (e.g., size, seed).
• Access the generated structure, and access at least a solution.
The maze generator module grants access to the maze structure, but it
is not necessarily the same format as the output file.
This entire reusable module (code and documentation) must be available in a single file
suitable for a later installation by pip.
This package must be called mazegen-* and the file must be located at the root of your
git repository.
Both .tar.gz and .whl extensions are allowed, as generated by the standard build of a
Python package.
Example of a full filename: mazegen-1.0.0-py3-none-any.whl .
You must provide in you Git repository all needed elements to build the package. This
will be asked during the evaluation: in a virtualenv or equivalent, install the needed tools
and build your package again from your sources.
The main README.md file (not part of the reusable module) must also contain this short
documentation.
13Chapter VII
Readme Requirements
A README.md file must be provided at the root of your Git repository. Its purpose is
to allow anyone unfamiliar with the project (peers, staff, recruiters, etc.) to quickly
understand what the project is about, how to run it, and where to find more information
on the topic.
The README.md must include at least:
• The very first line must be italicized and read: This project has been created as part
of the 42 curriculum by <login1>[, <login2>[, <login3>[...]]].
• A “Description” section that clearly presents the project, including its goal and a
brief overview.
• An “Instructions” section containing any relevant information about compilation,
installation, and/or execution.
• A “Resources” section listing classic references related to the topic (documen-
tation, articles, tutorials, etc.), as well as a description of how AI was used —
specifying for which tasks and which parts of the project.
➠ Additional sections may be required depending on the project (e.g., usage
examples, feature list, technical choices, etc.).
Any required additions will be explicitly listed below.
• The complete structure and format of your config file.
• The maze generation algorithm you chose.
• Why you chose this algorithm.
• What part of your code is reusable, and how.
• Your team and project management with:
◦ The roles of each team member.
14A-Maze-ing
This is the way
◦ Your anticipated planning and how it evolved until the end
◦ What worked well and what could be improved
◦ Have you used any specific tools? Which ones?
If you implement advanced features (multiple algorithms, display options), describe them
in this README.md file.
English is recommended; alternatively, you may use the main language
of your campus.
15Chapter VIII
Bonuses
You may add various bonuses to your project. Here are possible examples:
• Support multiple maze generation algorithms.
• Add animation during maze generation.
16Chapter IX
Submission and peer-evaluation
Submit your assignment in your Git repository as usual. Only the work inside your repos-
itory will be evaluated during the defense. Don’t hesitate to double-check the names of
your files to ensure they are correct.
During the evaluation, a brief modification of the project may occasionally be re-
quested. This could involve a minor behaviour change, a few lines of code to write or
rewrite, or an easy-to-add feature.
While this step may not be applicable to every project, you must be prepared for it
if it is mentioned in the evaluation guidelines.
This step is meant to verify your actual understanding of a specific part of the project.
The modification can be performed in any development environment you choose (e.g.,
your usual setup), and it should be feasible within a few minutes — unless a specific time
frame is defined as part of the evaluation.
You can, for example, be asked to make a small update to a function or script, modify a
display, or adjust a data structure to store new information, etc.
The details (scope, target, etc.) will be specified in the evaluation guidelines and may
vary from one evaluation to another for the same project.
17